# Modelling the Transport of Microplastics in the Ocean
The purpose of this project is to model the movement of microplastic particles in ocean waves. To do this, we have created an object representing an ocean
wave, and implemented the non-dimensional Maxey-Riley equation, using the `integrate.solve_ivp()` function from SciPy's `integrate` library to evaluate
the equation. Using this as our foundation, we can generate various visualisations of the data generated by our model.

## Contributing Members
- __Mary Eby__ -- author, _MAC-MIGS CDT_
- __Dr. Cathal Cummins__ -- supervisor, _Heriot-Watt University_
- __Prof. Jacques Vanneste__ -- supervisor, _University of Edinburgh_

### Methods Used
- Mathematical modelling
- Data visualization
- Object-oriented programming

### Technologies
- Python
- NumPy
- SciPy
- Pyplot

## Project Description
Plastic pollution in the global oceans has been a growing issue over the course of the past several decades. Specifically, the effects of microplastics,
or plastic particles smaller than 5mm in diameter, have been of special concern in marine environments. Scientists have observed a size-dependent movement
of microplastics from the ocean surface to the water column, but have not yet developed a full understanding of the mechanism behind this process. To
further the existing understanding of the movement of these particles, researchers are working to model the movement of microplastics in the global oceans
using the Maxey-Riley equation. However, existing models only account for cases of deep water and/or cases with microplastic particles that are
sufficiently small. We examine previous work done to model this process using the non-dimensional Maxey-Riley equation, and seek to increase the
robustness of existing models by employing more general solutions for the velocity field and the Stokes drift velocity, and including the
Basset-Boussinesq history term. In other words, our model is applicable for ocean water of any depth, and microplastic particles of any size.

## Source Code
The source code written for this project is contained in the `src` directory. The structure is object-oriented, with the exception of the
`figure9_reproduction.py` program, which was written in the early stages of the project before this structure was implemented.

`ocean_wave.py`  
This program contains the `OceanWave` class, which defines an object representing a wave in the ocean.

- `__init__(amplitude=0.1, wavelength=10, depth=8, density=2/3, stokes_num=1e-5, beta=1)`  
   Initializes an OceanWave object according to the default or provided parameters.
- `get_amplitude()`  
   Returns the amplitude $A$.  
- `get_wavelength()`  
   Returns the wavelength $\lambda$.
- `get_depth()`  
   Returns the depth $h$.
- `get_density()`  
   Returns the density $R$.
- `get_stokes_num()`  
   Returns the Stokes number $St$.
- `get_beta()`  
   Returns the value of beta.
- `get_wave_num`  
   Returns the wave number $k$.
- `get_angular_freq()`  
   Returns the angular frequency $\omega$.
- `get_max_velocity()`  
   Returns the maximum velocity $U$.
- `get_response_time()`  
   Returns the response time $\tau$.
- `get_period()`  
   Returns the period.
- `get_particle_history()`  
   Returns the history of v dot.
- `get_fluid_history()`  
   Returns the history of u dot.
- `get_timesteps()`  
   Returns the time steps at which the model is evaluated.
- `fluid_velocity(x, z, t)`  
   Returns the fluid velocity vector u for water of arbitrary depth.
- `fluid_accel(x, z, t)`  
   Returns the fluid acceleration u dot for water of arbitrary depth.
- `fluid_derivative(x, z, t)`  
   Returns the derivative along the trajectory of the fluid element, $\frac{\mathrm{D}\textit{\textbf{u}}}{\mathrm{D}t}$.
- `particle_trajectory(fun, x_0, z_0, u_0, w_0)`  
   Computes the particle trajectory for specified initial conditions.
- `particle_velocity(fun, x_0, z_0, u_0, w_0)`  
   Computes the particle velocities for specified initial conditions.
- `compare_drift_velocities(fun, initial_depths, x_0)`  
   Compares and plots the drift velocities for various initial depths.
- `mr_no_history(t, y)`  
   Returns the evaluation of the M-R equation without the history term.
- `mr_with_history(t, y)`  
   Returns the evaluation of the M-R equation with the history term.
- `santamaria(t, y)`  
   Returns the evaluation of the M-R equation using the model from Santamaria et al. 2013.
   
`single_trajectory.py`  
This program plots the trajectory of a single particle.  
`drift_vel_comparisons.py`  
This program plots the analytical and numerical solutions for the Stokes drift velocity for various depth cases: shallow, intermediate, and deep water.  
- `run_comparisons(depth)`  
   Runs drift velocity comparisons for a specified depth.  
   
`orbits_with_drift_vel.py`    
This program plots the analytical and numerical solutions for the Stokes drift velocity for the shallow, intermediate, and deep water cases, as well as plotting the corresponding particle trajectories.  
`figure9_reproduction.py`  
This program reproduces Figure 9 from Sevilla 2021, and is the only program that does not employ the object-oriented structure. In other words, the program is self-contained and does not import the `OceanWave` class.  
`relaxing_particle.py`  
This program plots the particle drift velocity for a relaxing particle case, as demonstrated in Prasath et al. 2019. The program is unfinished and is still a work in progress.  
`convergence_test.py`  
This program plots the convergence of the Stokes number and the critical Stokes number for various depths. The program is unfinished and is still a work in progress.
